4 Methodology
4.1 Overview
This section explains what has been done throughout the project, from dataset selection for training and testing, to the implementation of the multi agent sentiment analysis system pipeline. The first part of this section will be focusing on training and comparison on total of 9 models, then moving to the comparison of hyperparameter tuned model of selection from previous comparison, then lastly to the system implementation.

4.2 Dataset
There's total of 3 types of datasets that will be used in this project:
 the TweetEval dataset for model training/fine tuning,
 Real world manually labelled dataset for field test, and
 the real time collected dataset for sentiment analysis, which will be implemented later in the system.

4.2.1 TweetEval Dataset
TweetEval is a standardized NLP benchmark dataset compiled to evaluate how well Artificial Intelligence models understand the messy, informal, and nuanced language used on social media. The dataset unified seven distinct Twitter-specific text classification tasks into a single, standardized format, including emotion recognition, emoji prediction, irony detection, offensive language identification, hate speech detection, stance detection, and lastly sentiment analysis (Barbieri et al., 2020), which is the section that will be utilised in this project.
The sentiment analysis part of the dataset contains labelled data of comments/text gathered from social media platforms. It's splitted into 3 sections, including:
 train section (45,615 rows),
 validation section (2,000 rows), and
 test section (12,284 rows).
All of the 3 sections are used for training, validating, and testing the 9 models from the Classical ML, Deep Learning, and Transformer families.

4.2.2 Field Test Dataset
This dataset is collected using the Arctic Shift API, which is an open source project that archives Reddit data from all subreddits in real time. The API of this individual developed project consists of a function that will return comments from users on a specific subreddit based on the requirements of the API user.
The content of this dataset consists of combination of comments from different subreddits, including subreddits of famous people (r/Donald, r/Elonmusk, etc.), events (r/worldcup), products (r/iphone, r/Samsung, etc.) and so on. The data is randomly selected from each separate dataset to ensure naturalness and randomness, then combined into a single, 1000 rows dataset. Then, it's sentiment (Positive, Neutral, Negative) were labelled manually to ensure the correctness of the labels.
During the testing of models performance, the TweetEval dataset and this field test dataset were used to examine the Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score, and determine how the models actually perform when implemented in the real world scenario.

4.2.3 Real Time Collected Dataset
This dataset is the dataset that will be collected in real time, using the Arctic Shift API, which will be handled by the Scraper Agent, to collect data from subreddits determined from topics/products/trends input by user.
After the data is collected from several subreddits related to the topic, it will then go through several stages to reach the final sentiment analysed dataset. First, it will be passed to the Preprocessor Agent to perform preprocessing strategies for different use cases:

Wordcloud: Lowercasing, URL and user mention removal, Tokenisation (splitting text into individual word tokens), Stopword removal (common English stopwords alongside topic-specific irrelevant words identified by the Language Model), Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging using the spaCy library to categorise each token as a noun, verb, adjective, or other grammatical type, and Lemmatisation (reducing each word to its dictionary base form, for example "running" becomes "run") are performed on the data. The resulting filtered word lists are used to generate wordcloud visualisations that highlight the most frequently discussed terms within each sentiment category, and allow users to toggle between noun-focused, verb-focused, and adjective-focused views.

ABSA: For Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis, the text data undergoes the same preprocessing steps as the sentiment analysis pipeline. The cleaned texts are subsequently passed to the Analyst Agent's ABSA module, which applies BERTopic together with UMAP for dimensionality reduction and HDBSCAN for density-based clustering to automatically discover recurring aspect topics from the comments. Examples of discovered aspects include "Battery Life", "Camera Quality", or "Pricing". Each aspect cluster is then labelled with a concise human-readable name generated by the Language Model based on the cluster's representative terms.

Sentiment Analysis: For sentiment classification, BERTweet-specific preprocessing is applied, which includes URL normalisation (replacing all hyperlinks with the token "http"), user mention normalisation (replacing @username handles with the placeholder "@USER"), and text truncation to a maximum of 128 tokens in order to comply with the BERTweet model's input length constraint. Each preprocessed text is kept paired with its original timestamp so that the Analyst Agent can later generate a chronological sentiment timeline. This ensures the text is in the format most compatible with the fine-tuned BERTweet model.

4.3 EDA
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) was conducted on both the TweetEval dataset and the Field Test dataset prior to the model training stage, with the purpose of understanding the nature and distribution of the data, detecting potential issues such as class imbalance, identifying dominant text patterns and vocabulary characteristics, and informing decisions regarding preprocessing strategies and model selection.

4.3.1 TweetEval Dataset EDA
The TweetEval sentiment analysis dataset was first analysed in terms of its class distribution across all three splits. The label distribution across the training set revealed a moderate class imbalance, with the Neutral class accounting for the largest proportion, followed by Positive and Negative. Specifically, the training split contains [X] Positive ([X]%), [X] Neutral ([X]%), and [X] Negative ([X]%) samples. A similar distribution pattern was observed in both the validation and test splits, suggesting that the imbalance is consistent and representative rather than a splitting artefact.

Text length analysis was also carried out to examine the character and word count distributions of the tweets. The average text length in the training set was approximately [X] tokens per sample, with the majority of samples falling within the range of [X] to [X] tokens. Given that the dataset originates from Twitter, this short-form nature of the text is expected, and is one of the key reasons why BERTweet, which is specifically pre-trained on Twitter data, was selected as a primary candidate model for this task.

A word frequency analysis was performed on each class separately to identify dominant terms and themes. Positive tweets frequently contained words such as "great", "love", "amazing", and "best", while Negative tweets were characterised by terms such as "bad", "terrible", "hate", and "worst". Neutral tweets contained more factual and descriptive language with lower affective polarity. These patterns confirmed that the dataset carries clear lexical signals per sentiment class, supporting the feasibility of both lexicon-based and machine learning approaches.

4.3.2 Field Test Dataset EDA
The Field Test dataset, consisting of 1,000 manually labelled Reddit comments collected across various topic-specific subreddits, was similarly analysed. The class distribution was found to be [X] Positive ([X]%), [X] Neutral ([X]%), and [X] Negative ([X]%) samples.

Unlike the TweetEval dataset which is sourced from Twitter, Reddit comments tend to be longer and more conversational in nature. The average text length in this dataset was approximately [X] tokens, which is notably higher than the average tweet length in TweetEval. This difference in text characteristics is important as it tests whether models trained on short Twitter texts can generalise effectively to longer Reddit comment styles, making this dataset a valuable out-of-domain evaluation benchmark.

Word frequency and bigram analysis further revealed domain-specific vocabulary depending on the subreddit source. For instance, comments from technology subreddits contained technical product-specific terminology, while comments from celebrity or event subreddits were more opinion-driven and colloquial. These differences highlight the linguistic diversity of the dataset and the importance of selecting a model that can handle varied linguistic styles robustly.

4.4 Preprocessing
Text preprocessing is an essential step that transforms raw social media text into a format that machine learning and deep learning models can effectively learn from. Without proper preprocessing, noise from informal language, special characters, URLs, and abbreviations can significantly degrade model performance. In this project, two distinct preprocessing pipelines were applied: a general pipeline for Classical ML and Deep Learning models, and a targeted pipeline specifically designed for Transformer-based models.

4.4.1 General Preprocessing (Classical ML and Deep Learning Models)
For Classical Machine Learning models (such as Logistic Regression, SVM, and Naive Bayes) and Deep Learning models (such as LSTM and CNN), the following preprocessing steps were applied to both the TweetEval and Field Test datasets:

Lowercasing: All text was converted to lowercase to ensure that words such as "Great" and "great" are treated as identical tokens, reducing vocabulary size without losing information.
URL Removal: All hyperlinks beginning with "http", "https", or "www" were removed, as they do not carry sentiment information relevant to classification.
User Mention Removal: Twitter and Reddit user mentions in the format @username were removed, as they are references to individuals rather than expressions of opinion.
Special Character and Punctuation Removal: Non-alphanumeric characters, including punctuation marks and symbols, were removed from the text to reduce noise.
Tokenisation: The cleaned text was split into individual word tokens using whitespace-based splitting.
Stopword Removal: Common English stopwords (such as "the", "is", "and", "a") were removed using the NLTK stopword list, as they occur frequently across all classes but carry minimal sentiment information and would otherwise dominate frequency-based feature representations.
Lemmatisation: Words were reduced to their base dictionary form (for example, "running" becomes "run", and "better" becomes "good") using the NLTK WordNet Lemmatiser. This reduces vocabulary size and groups together morphological variants of the same word, improving generalisation.

Following these steps, for Classical ML models, the preprocessed text was converted into numerical feature vectors using the Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) method, which represents each text based on the relative importance of each word across the corpus. For Deep Learning models, the cleaned text was further tokenised and mapped to integer sequences using pre-trained word embeddings.

4.4.2 BERTweet-Specific Preprocessing (Transformer Models)
For BERTweet and other Transformer-based models, a different and more targeted preprocessing strategy was applied. Since Transformer models are pre-trained on large text corpora and are capable of understanding contextual meaning, heavy cleaning operations such as stopword removal and lemmatisation are unnecessary and may in fact remove contextually useful information. Instead, preprocessing was kept minimal and focused on normalising the text into a format consistent with BERTweet's pre-training data conventions:

URL Normalisation: All URLs were replaced with the single token "http" rather than being removed entirely, as BERTweet was pre-trained with this normalisation applied to all Twitter data and therefore expects this token to appear in the input.
User Mention Normalisation: All @username mentions were replaced with the placeholder token "@USER", consistent with the format of BERTweet's pre-training corpus.
Token Length Limitation: Text sequences were truncated or padded to a maximum of 128 tokens. While BERTweet supports inputs of up to 512 tokens, 128 tokens provides an optimal balance between computational efficiency and information retention for short social media texts, as the majority of tweets and Reddit comments fall well within this length.

These targeted preprocessing steps ensure that the input text closely resembles the format of the data on which BERTweet was originally pre-trained, which is critical for achieving strong fine-tuning performance.

4.5 Model Training and Comparison

4.6 Hyperparameter Tuning on Selected Model
After BERTweet is selected as the best performing model from the comparison in the last section, the hyperparameter tuning process is done to search for the best parameters to fine tune the model.
Optuna, which is an open-source Python framework designed specifically to automate hyperparameter tuning for models.
Optuna operates using a clean, object-oriented structure centered around three main terms:
Objective Function: A standard Python function that is manually written. It defines the model, trains it using a set of hyperparameters, and returns a performance metric (e.g., maximizing the Macro-F1 score or minimizing loss on dataset validation set).
Trial: A single execution of the objective function. During one trial, Optuna picks a specific combination of hyperparameters, plugs them into your model, runs the training, and records the score.
Study: A collection of trials. A study manages the optimization process, remembers which hyperparameter combinations worked best, and decides what numbers to try next.

4.7 System Implementation
4.7.1 Overview
A web application was built to implement the fine tuned model to a real world settings. This application consists of two modes, namely the Single Mode and Compare Mode, which Single Mode will only perform sentiment analysis on one topic/product/trend entered by user, while the Compare Mode will first perform sentiment analysis on both topics/products/trends separately, then compare them side by side to see the sentiment difference between them.
This application covers the end-to-end pipeline of the sentiment analysis process, from data collection, to data cleaning and preprocessing, then perform sentiment analysis, lastly create the visuals including overall sentiment distribution, timeline graph, wordclouds, ABSA graphs/heatmaps, and insights/recommendations from the Advisor Agent based on the results.

4.7.2 Backend and Frontend
The system architecture follows a decoupled client-server design, separating the analytical backend from the user-facing frontend into two independently running processes that communicate through HTTP.

The backend is implemented using FastAPI, a modern, high-performance Python web framework well-suited for building RESTful APIs. FastAPI was chosen for its asynchronous request handling capabilities, automatic request body validation through Pydantic models, and its ability to dispatch long-running tasks into background threads without blocking incoming HTTP requests or causing client-side timeouts. The backend runs on port 8000 and exposes a set of REST API endpoints that the frontend communicates with. The key endpoints are:

GET /health: A lightweight health check endpoint that returns the current server status and timestamp. It is used by the frontend to confirm the backend is online before submitting any job.
POST /scrape/start: Accepts a JSON request body containing the topic, optional list of subreddits, and the analysis mode ("single" or "compare"). Upon receiving the request, the backend generates a unique job identifier (UUID), registers the job in the database, and dispatches the five-agent pipeline as a daemon background thread. The HTTP response is returned immediately with the job ID, so the user is not left waiting for the full analysis to complete before receiving a response.
GET /scrape/status/{job_id}: Returns a lightweight status object for the specified job, including the current progress percentage (0 to 100), the current status ("pending", "running", "completed", or "error"), and the job timestamps. This endpoint is polled every five seconds by the frontend to display the live progress bar to the user.
GET /scrape/results/{job_id}: Returns the full results payload for a completed job, including all agent outputs, the final shared state snapshot for that job, and any cached Root Cause Analysis results. This endpoint is called only after the job status confirms completion, avoiding unnecessarily large responses during processing.
POST /rca/{job_id}: Triggers a Root Cause Analysis for a specific anomaly date detected in the sentiment timeline. The results are cached within the job record so that repeated requests for the same date are served instantly without re-running the external search.

The frontend is built using Streamlit, a Python framework that enables rapid development of interactive data visualisation web applications without requiring separate frontend development. The frontend runs on port 8501 and communicates with the backend exclusively through HTTP requests to the above API endpoints. It is organised into four functional sections:

Main Tab: The primary input interface where the user enters a topic name, optionally adjusts the target subreddits, and toggles Compare Mode to add a second topic. Submitting the form triggers one or two job requests to the backend depending on the selected mode.
Monitoring Tab: The application automatically transitions to this tab after job submission. It displays live progress bars for the active job or jobs by polling the backend every five seconds. In Compare Mode, both jobs are monitored simultaneously, and the user is directed to the comparison results only after both have successfully completed.
Results Tab: Displays the full single-mode analysis results for the completed job, including the sentiment distribution chart, sentiment timeline with anomaly markers, wordcloud visualisations, ABSA heatmap, AI-generated section insights, strategic recommendations, suggested follow-up questions, and an interactive Q&A chat interface.
Compare Results Tab: Available exclusively in Compare Mode, this tab presents a structured side-by-side comparison across five sub-tabs: Summary, Timeline, Wordcloud, Aspect Analysis, and AI Advisor, enabling users to directly contrast the public sentiment of two topics.

4.7.3 Shared State
A key architectural component of the multi-agent pipeline is the shared state mechanism, which acts as the central communication blackboard that all agents read from and write to as they process data sequentially. This design follows the Blackboard architectural pattern, where individual agents are loosely coupled and do not directly call one another. Instead, each agent reads its required inputs from the shared state and writes its outputs back to the same file, enabling the next agent in the pipeline to seamlessly pick up where the previous one left off.

The shared state is implemented as a single JSON file named shared_state.json, stored at the root of the project directory. To support parallel job execution in Compare Mode, where two independent analysis pipelines run simultaneously in separate background threads, the state file is structured with per-job namespacing. The top-level structure of the file is as follows:

{
  "mode": "single" or "compare",
  "jobs": {
    "<job_id_A>": {
      "metadata": { "topic": "...", "status": "...", "category": "...", ... },
      "filtered_data_path": "path/to/collected_data.json",
      "processed_data": [ ... ],
      "sentiment_results": { "overall_sentiment": "...", "confidence": ..., ... },
      "aspect_analysis": { "Battery Life": { ... }, "Camera": { ... }, ... },
      "advisor_insights": { "summary": "...", "timeline": "...", ... },
      "recommendations": [ ... ],
      "visuals_ready": true
    },
    "<job_id_B>": { ... }
  }
}

The top-level "mode" field indicates whether the current session is running a single analysis or a side-by-side comparison, allowing agents to contextualise their execution accordingly. Each job maintains its own completely isolated namespace under the "jobs" key, using the unique job identifier (UUID) assigned at submission time as the key. This design ensures that data written by one job's agents never overwrites or interferes with the data of another concurrently executing job, which is a critical requirement for the correct functioning of Compare Mode.

To prevent race conditions where two parallel job threads attempt to read and write the shared file simultaneously, a module-level threading.Lock() object is defined in the BaseAgent base class and shared across all agent instances. Any read-modify-write operation on the shared state file is wrapped within a lock acquisition block, ensuring that only one thread can modify the file at any given instant. This makes the shared state fully thread-safe while remaining simple to use across all agents.

Each agent interacts with the shared state through two methods inherited from the BaseAgent base class: save_state(key, value), which atomically writes a key-value pair into the agent's job-specific namespace, and load_state(), which returns only the current job's slice of the shared state. This prevents any agent from accidentally reading another job's data, regardless of what else is concurrently being written to the file.

4.7.4 Multi AI Agent System
The system is structured as a pipeline of five specialised AI agents, each responsible for a distinct stage of the analysis process. The agents are orchestrated sequentially within a background thread managed by the backend task module, and they communicate exclusively through the shared state.

Orchestrator
The orchestration logic is implemented in the backend task module (tasks.py), which coordinates the end-to-end execution of the agent pipeline for each submitted job. When a new job is dispatched, the orchestrator first calls BaseAgent.register_job() to initialise the job's namespace in the shared state file and record the analysis mode. It then instantiates and executes each of the five agents in sequence, specifically ScraperAgent, followed by ProcessorAgent, AnalystAgent, AdvisorAgent, and finally VisualizationAgent. Progress updates are written to the job database at each stage boundary (20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 65%, 75%, 85%, 90%, 95%, and 100%), which the frontend polls every five seconds to update the live progress display. If any agent raises an exception, the orchestrator catches the error, marks the job as failed in the database with the corresponding error message, and halts the pipeline immediately to prevent subsequent agents from running on incomplete or missing data. Upon successful pipeline completion, the orchestrator reads the final state snapshot from the job's namespace in the shared state and stores it alongside all agent return values in the job database, making the full results retrievable via the /scrape/results/{job_id} endpoint.

Scraper Agent
The Scraper Agent is responsible for the data collection stage of the pipeline. It begins by extracting the topic name from the user's natural language input. For example, from the input "I want to know what people are thinking about iPhone 17 Pro Max", the system will extract "iPhone 17 Pro Max" as the topic to search for. The extracted topic is then passed to the infer_topic_structure tool, which uses the Language Model to classify the topic's domain (for example, "Consumer Electronics - flagship smartphone product of Apple"), generate a set of semantically relevant search keywords that are likely to appear in relevant posts, and identify up to three subreddits that are most likely to host related community discussion.

Once the topic structure is established, the scrape_with_api tool connects to the Arctic Shift Reddit archive API to perform the actual data collection. An algorithm was designed to ensure efficient and targeted collection within a fixed time budget of 25 minutes. For each subreddit, the system scans backwards through the post history looking for posts whose title or body text contains any of the generated keywords. When a keyword-matching post is identified, all associated user comments are extracted and added to the collection. This process continues across subreddits until the minimum required volume of 500 comments is reached, the 25-minute time limit expires, or all candidate subreddits have been exhausted. To avoid wasting time on subreddits where the topic is rarely discussed, an early bail-out mechanism is incorporated: if three consecutive pages of posts (each page containing up to 100 posts) return zero keyword-matching results, the system immediately skips to the next subreddit rather than continuing to scan its full history.

If the Arctic Shift API returns no usable results, two fallback mechanisms are triggered in sequence. First, the YouTube Data API v3 is queried for video comments related to the topic. Second, if no live data can be collected from either source, a locally cached dataset from a previous scrape of the same topic is loaded from the local storage directory.

Once data collection is complete, the Scraper Agent saves the collected dataset as a versioned JSON file in the data/filtered_data/ directory (using a versioned filename to avoid overwriting results from previous runs on the same topic), records the exact file path in the shared state under the filtered_data_path key, and saves topic metadata including the domain category, keywords used, subreddits scraped, total comment count, and data source under the metadata key so that downstream agents can reference this information during processing.

Preprocessor Agent
The Preprocessor Agent reads the raw collected dataset from the file path recorded by the Scraper Agent in the shared state. It is designed to handle two raw data formats: the standard format produced by the Scraper Agent (a structured JSON object with subreddit, posts, and comments fields) and a flat record format (a list of individual comment records from external sources), allowing the system to process data from different collection sources without requiring separate code paths.

For each collected dataset, the Preprocessor Agent applies two parallel preprocessing pipelines to produce outputs suitable for the different analytical tasks that follow downstream:

Wordcloud Preprocessing: The raw comment text is processed to extract the most semantically meaningful words for visualisation purposes. This involves lowercasing the text, removing URLs and user mentions, tokenising the text into individual word tokens, removing common English stopwords as well as topic-specific filler words identified by the Language Model (for example, the topic name itself, which would otherwise dominate the wordcloud), applying Part-of-Speech tagging using the spaCy natural language processing library to label each remaining token as a noun, verb, adjective, or other grammatical category, and applying lemmatisation to normalise word forms to their base dictionary form. The output is a filtered word list where each word is annotated with its grammatical type, enabling the frontend to let users toggle between noun-focused, verb-focused, and adjective-focused wordcloud views.

Sentiment Preprocessing: The raw comment text undergoes BERTweet-specific normalisation to prepare it for the fine-tuned sentiment classifier. All URLs are replaced with the token "http" and all @username mentions are replaced with "@USER", consistent with the conventions applied during BERTweet's pre-training on Twitter data. The normalised text is then truncated to a maximum of 128 tokens. Critically, each preprocessed text is kept paired with its original creation timestamp from the metadata of the source post or comment, so that the Analyst Agent can later construct a chronological sentiment timeline showing how public opinion has evolved over time. Text items that are empty or too short after preprocessing are discarded.

The processed data, including both the tagged wordcloud word lists and the timestamp-aligned sentiment-ready text pairs, is saved to the shared state under the processed_data key for the Analyst Agent to consume in the next stage.

Analyst Agent
The Analyst Agent handles all data analysis tasks, including overall sentiment classification and Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA).

For overall sentiment analysis, the agent loads the preprocessed sentiment texts from the shared state and passes them in batches to the fine-tuned BERTweet model, which runs on the GPU using CUDA for accelerated inference. BERTweet classifies each text independently as Positive, Neutral, or Negative, producing a label and a confidence score per text. The individual predictions are then aggregated across the entire comment corpus to produce a single overall sentiment label for the topic, an overall confidence score, a full three-class sentiment distribution showing the count and percentage for each class, and a list of detailed per-text sentiment records each paired with their original timestamp. These timestamp-aligned sentiment records are used by the Visualization Agent to generate the sentiment timeline chart. The timeline is also analysed using a rolling Z-score anomaly detection algorithm, which computes a rolling seven-day average sentiment score and flags any date where the negative sentiment rate exceeds the rolling mean by more than 2.5 standard deviations as a statistically significant anomaly. These anomaly dates are marked on the timeline chart and made available for Root Cause Analysis.

For ABSA, the agent attempts to discover recurring aspect topics from the comment corpus using BERTopic, a topic modelling framework that combines Sentence Transformers for text-to-vector encoding, UMAP for dimensionality reduction into a lower-dimensional embedding space, and HDBSCAN for density-based clustering into coherent topic groups. The sentence embeddings are computed on the CPU using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model in order to avoid GPU memory conflicts with the BERTweet model already occupying GPU memory. For each discovered cluster, a c-TF-IDF representation is computed and passed to the Language Model to generate a concise human-readable aspect label. If the BERTopic approach fails due to insufficient data volume or clustering instability, a fallback pipeline using K-Means clustering combined with c-TF-IDF topic representation is automatically applied. All discovered aspects together with their associated per-aspect sentiment distributions (the count and percentage of Positive, Neutral, and Negative comments mentioning each aspect) are saved to the shared state under the aspect_analysis key.

Visualization Agent
The Visualization Agent prepares all visual outputs from the analysis results stored in the shared state. It reads the processed_data, sentiment_results, and aspect_analysis produced by the upstream agents and generates the following visualisations:

Sentiment Distribution Chart: A donut chart displaying the proportional breakdown of Positive, Neutral, and Negative sentiment across all analysed comments, colour-coded in green, grey, and red respectively, giving users an immediate visual summary of the overall public mood.
Sentiment Timeline Chart: An interactive line chart built with Plotly, showing how the average daily sentiment score has evolved over the data collection period. Dates identified by the anomaly detection algorithm as statistically unusual negative spikes are marked with red triangle markers directly on the chart, prompting users to click and investigate the underlying cause through the Root Cause Analysis feature.
Wordcloud Visualisations: Using the WordCloud Python library, separate wordcloud images are generated for the Overall, Positive, Neutral, and Negative comment subsets. Each subset is further filterable by grammatical word type (nouns, verbs, or adjectives) using the toggle in the frontend. The wordcloud images are encoded in base64 format and cached per job, so they are not regenerated unnecessarily on subsequent UI page reruns.
Aspect Sentiment Heatmap: A colour-coded heatmap displaying the top named aspects discovered through ABSA. Each row represents one aspect, and each column represents a sentiment class (Positive, Neutral, Negative). Each cell shows the percentage of comments expressing that sentiment towards the aspect, with deeper colour intensity indicating a higher concentration. This allows users to quickly identify which product or service features attract the most praise or criticism from the community.
Aspect Sentiment Bar Chart: A grouped bar chart presenting the same aspect-level data in a complementary format, showing absolute comment counts per sentiment class per aspect.

All generated visualisation data, chart configurations, and image data are assembled into a visualization_data dictionary and saved back to the shared state, which is also returned as part of the Visualization Agent's result for storage in the job database.

Advisor Agent
The Advisor Agent is the final stage of the pipeline and is powered by the Groq-hosted Llama-3.3-70B Versatile language model accessed through the LangChain framework. Its primary role is to interpret the quantitative analysis results produced by all preceding agents and translate them into human-readable, actionable insights, strategic recommendations, and conversational responses.

For each of the four main visualisation sections of the application (Summary, Timeline, Wordcloud, and Aspect Analysis), the Advisor Agent constructs a targeted prompt that includes the relevant numerical data and instructs the Language Model to generate a concise, data-grounded insight of two to three sentences specific to that section. For example, the Summary insight interprets the overall sentiment distribution and confidence score, the Timeline insight highlights notable trends and anomaly periods detected, the Wordcloud insight identifies the dominant themes emerging from the most frequent terms, and the ABSA insight pinpoints the aspects with the most polarised sentiment. These section-specific insights are saved to the shared state under advisor_insights, and displayed in the frontend as expandable AI Advisor panels positioned beneath each corresponding visualisation.

In addition to section insights, the Advisor Agent generates a set of strategic recommendations derived from the ABSA results. It identifies the aspects with the highest concentrations of negative sentiment and formulates actionable suggestions for improvement. A list of five contextually relevant suggested follow-up questions is also generated and presented to the user, which they can click to automatically submit to the interactive Q&A chat interface without needing to type.

The Advisor Agent supports interactive Q&A through its answer_question() method. When the user types or selects a question in the chat interface, the method assembles a context window containing the topic, overall sentiment distribution, top aspect scores, and the key section insights, then prompts the Language Model to answer the question in three to five sentences with direct reference to the available data. This enables users to ask open-ended follow-up questions about the analysis results without needing to interpret the raw charts themselves.

For Compare Mode, the Advisor Agent additionally generates a Competitive Benchmark Report that contrasts both analysed topics simultaneously. The report is structured into three sections: Competitive Edge (identifying which topic holds a stronger positive public sentiment and why), System Vulnerabilities (highlighting the specific aspects where each topic faces the most criticism), and Market Sentiment Verdict (providing an overall comparative conclusion on which topic the public currently perceives more favourably). This report is generated by passing the sentiment distributions and top aspects of both topics together into a single LLM prompt, producing an integrated analysis that neither single-mode run could produce alone.


5 Results and Discussion

5.1 EDA Results

5.1.1 TweetEval Dataset
The exploratory analysis of the TweetEval training dataset revealed a moderate class imbalance across all three sentiment classes. The Neutral class accounted for the largest proportion of samples, followed by Positive and then Negative. The specific class breakdown across the training set was [X] Positive ([X]%), [X] Neutral ([X]%), and [X] Negative ([X]%) samples out of the total 45,615 training rows. A consistent imbalance pattern was observed across the validation and test splits as well. This finding indicated that models relying on accuracy alone as the evaluation metric could achieve misleadingly high scores by over-predicting the majority Neutral class. Consequently, the macro-averaged F1-Score was selected as the primary evaluation metric throughout the model comparison, as it weights each class equally regardless of their frequency.

Text length analysis showed that the average tweet in the training set contained approximately [X] tokens, with the majority of samples falling between [X] and [X] tokens. The short-form nature of the text, which is characteristic of Twitter posts, confirmed the appropriateness of selecting BERTweet as a key model candidate, since it is the only pre-trained language model in the candidate pool specifically trained on Twitter text of this format and length.

The word frequency analysis per sentiment class showed clearly distinct vocabulary patterns. Positive tweets were dominated by terms such as "great", "love", "amazing", and "happy", while Negative tweets featured terms such as "bad", "terrible", "hate", and "disappointed". Neutral tweets showed more objective and informational language without strong affective terms. These patterns supported the feasibility of both lexicon-based and learned feature approaches for this classification task.

5.1.2 Field Test Dataset
The 1,000-sample manually-labelled Field Test dataset exhibited a class distribution of [X] Positive ([X]%), [X] Neutral ([X]%), and [X] Negative ([X]%) samples. The average comment length in this dataset was approximately [X] tokens, which is substantially longer than the average TweetEval tweet, reflecting the more conversational and elaborate style typical of Reddit comments compared to Twitter posts.

This difference in text characteristics served as a useful test of cross-domain generalisation: models trained on short Twitter texts were required to handle longer, more nuanced Reddit comment styles during field testing. Analysis of word frequency per subreddit source revealed clear domain-specific vocabulary, with technology subreddits containing product-specific technical terminology, and celebrity or event subreddits containing more informal, opinion-heavy language. The results confirmed that this dataset provides a meaningfully different evaluation challenge compared to the in-domain TweetEval test set.

5.2 System Implementation Results

5.2.1 Single Mode Operation
The single-mode analysis pipeline was evaluated across a range of topics covering consumer electronics, public figures, and trending events. For each topic, the system successfully executed the full five-agent pipeline from data collection through to AI-generated insights within the 25-minute time budget in the majority of test cases.

For a representative example using the topic "iPhone 17 Pro Max", the Scraper Agent identified the subreddits r/iphone, r/apple, and r/technology as the most relevant sources, collected [X] comments from [X] keyword-matched posts, and saved the dataset to local storage. The Preprocessor Agent produced [X] cleaned text-timestamp pairs for sentiment analysis and [X] tagged word tokens for wordcloud generation. The Analyst Agent classified the comments as [X]% Positive, [X]% Neutral, and [X]% Negative, yielding an overall sentiment of [overall label] with a confidence score of [X]%. The ABSA module discovered [X] distinct aspects from the comment corpus, with "Camera Quality" and "Battery Life" appearing as the most frequently discussed, showing positive sentiment rates of [X]% and [X]% respectively. The sentiment timeline displayed a declining trend in positive sentiment during [date period], and the anomaly detection algorithm flagged [X] statistically significant negative spike(s) on [date(s)]. Root Cause Analysis on these dates returned [verdict] verdicts, linking the spike(s) to external events such as [event description]. The Advisor Agent generated targeted insights for each visualisation section and produced [X] strategic recommendations addressing the aspects with the highest negative concentrations.

5.2.2 Compare Mode Operation
The Compare Mode was tested using pairs of competing products and trends. The system successfully dispatched two independent analysis jobs simultaneously, each executing the complete five-agent pipeline in an isolated background thread. The per-job namespace isolation in the shared state ensured that the two concurrently running pipelines did not interfere with each other's data at any stage, even when both jobs were in the same processing stage simultaneously.

For a sample comparison of "iPhone 17 Pro Max" versus "Samsung Galaxy S26 Ultra", both jobs completed within the time limit and the results were presented across the five comparison sub-tabs. The Summary tab showed that [topic A] held a [X]% higher positive sentiment score than [topic B]. The Aspect Analysis tab revealed that [topic A] showed stronger community sentiment in the areas of [aspects], while [topic B] demonstrated relatively stronger positive sentiment around [aspects]. The AI Advisor's Competitive Benchmark Report synthesised these findings into the three structured sections, providing stakeholders with a concise, data-driven comparative view of how the public perceives each product.

5.3 Discussion

5.3.1 Sentiment Analysis Accuracy in Real-World Deployment
The overall sentiment analysis results produced by the deployed fine-tuned BERTweet model showed strong alignment with the expected public sentiment for the tested topics. Products associated with recent controversies or widely reported quality issues showed higher proportions of negative sentiment in the collected data, while positively received products or favourably covered events showed dominant positive distributions. This qualitative consistency between system output and publicly known reception suggests that the system accurately captures the general public mood reflected in community discussion, and that fine-tuning BERTweet on the TweetEval dataset transferred reasonably well to the Reddit comment domain.

5.3.2 Scraper Robustness and Efficiency
The introduction of the early bail-out mechanism in the Scraper Agent, which skips a subreddit after three consecutive keyword-empty pages, was observed to meaningfully reduce wasted API requests for topics where one or more of the selected subreddits had low topical relevance. This improvement allowed the system to reallocate the saved time budget toward the remaining subreddits, increasing the probability of reaching the minimum comment target within the 25-minute window. The three-tier fallback chain (Arctic Shift API, then YouTube Data API, then local cache) further ensured that the pipeline was able to return at least some data for analysis in cases where the primary Reddit source returned no results, improving the overall robustness of the data collection stage.

5.3.3 ABSA Effectiveness
The BERTopic-based ABSA approach was able to discover meaningful and interpretable aspect clusters for topics with sufficient comment volume (approximately 500 or more comments). For high-discussion topics such as major consumer electronics products, the discovered aspects consistently corresponded to recognisable product dimensions (for example, camera, battery, performance, design, and price) that aligned with the aspects commonly discussed in product reviews. For lower-volume or niche topics, the BERTopic approach occasionally produced less distinct clusters, in which case the K-Means fallback yielded more stable (though coarser) aspect groupings. This suggests that while the ABSA component adds significant analytical depth for popular topics, its effectiveness is inherently tied to the richness and volume of the available comment data.

5.3.4 Limitations
Several limitations were identified during system evaluation. First, the Arctic Shift API imposes a mandatory 1.5-second delay between every network request as a rate-limiting measure, which means data collection for a single topic requires at minimum several minutes even when the target comment volume is quickly reached. Second, the system currently supports only English-language text, as both the TweetEval training data and the BERTweet model are English-language resources. Comments written in other languages present in the collected dataset are not excluded automatically and may introduce noise into the sentiment classification results. Third, the ABSA module's clustering approach requires a sufficient volume and diversity of text to produce meaningful topics; for niche topics with limited community discussion, the aspect discovery may produce generic or uninformative clusters. Finally, the application runs as a local server setup, requiring the user to manually start both the FastAPI backend and the Streamlit frontend processes before use.


6 Conclusion

6.1 Summary
This project designed and implemented a multi-agent AI system capable of performing comprehensive sentiment analysis on real-time social media data, with the objective of providing users with data-driven, actionable insights into public opinion on any topic, product, or trend. The system was built around a sequential pipeline of five specialised AI agents, namely the Scraper Agent, Preprocessor Agent, Analyst Agent, Advisor Agent, and Visualization Agent, each responsible for a distinct stage of the analysis process. The agents communicate through a thread-safe, job-namespaced shared state mechanism that ensures data isolation between parallel jobs, enabling both single-topic analysis and side-by-side comparison of two topics simultaneously through the Compare Mode feature.

6.2 Achievements
The following objectives were successfully achieved throughout the course of this project:

A systematic comparison of nine sentiment classification models spanning the Classical Machine Learning, Deep Learning, and Transformer model families was conducted using both the TweetEval benchmark dataset and a manually-labelled real-world Reddit comment field test dataset. BERTweet was identified as the best-performing model and was further optimised through Optuna-based automated hyperparameter tuning to achieve the best possible classification performance on social media text.

A fully functional end-to-end multi-agent sentiment analysis web application was developed and deployed as a local web service. The application is capable of collecting real-time Reddit data on any user-specified topic through the Arctic Shift API, preprocessing the collected data through parallel pipelines tailored for wordcloud generation, sentiment classification, and aspect discovery, performing three-class sentiment classification using the fine-tuned BERTweet model on GPU, discovering recurring discussion aspects through Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis using BERTopic with UMAP and HDBSCAN clustering, detecting statistically anomalous sentiment spikes through rolling Z-score analysis, and generating AI-powered section insights, strategic recommendations, and suggested questions through the Llama-3.3-70B language model.

A Compare Mode feature was successfully implemented, enabling users to simultaneously analyse and compare the public sentiment of two competing topics side-by-side. Per-job state isolation and thread-safe file access ensure that two parallel analysis pipelines execute concurrently without data contamination, and the results are presented in a structured five-tab comparison interface with an AI-generated Competitive Benchmark Report.

A Root Cause Analysis (RCA) feature was integrated into the sentiment timeline, allowing users to investigate the external news events or public incidents that may have caused detected anomalous negative sentiment spikes. The RCA system uses a three-tier web search fallback chain (Tavily, then Serper, then Google Custom Search Engine) combined with LLM-based synthesis to produce a structured root cause summary and a verdict on whether a credible external cause was found.

6.3 Limitations
While the system achieves its stated objectives, several limitations remain. The reliance on the Arctic Shift Reddit API means that data collection speed is constrained by the API's built-in rate limits, and the system is subject to changes in API availability or data coverage. The sentiment classification model's performance is limited to English-language text, and its accuracy on highly domain-specific, highly sarcastic, or code-switching text may be lower than on general social media content. The ABSA module's clustering approach requires a minimum volume of text data to function reliably, making it less informative for topics with limited online discussion. Finally, the system currently operates as a local server setup requiring manual startup of both the backend and frontend processes, which reduces accessibility for non-technical users.

6.4 Future Work
Several enhancements are proposed for future development. First, multilingual support could be integrated by incorporating a multilingual pre-trained model such as XLM-RoBERTa, enabling the system to analyse sentiment expressed in languages beyond English and significantly broadening the range of topics that can be effectively analysed. Second, the data collection layer could be extended beyond Reddit to include other major platforms such as Twitter/X, YouTube video comments, and news article comment sections, improving the breadth and diversity of the collected social media data. Third, the system could be containerised using Docker and deployed to a cloud platform such as AWS or Google Cloud Run, making it accessible as a hosted web service that does not require local server setup from the end user. Fourth, the ABSA module could be enhanced with fine-grained, sentence-level aspect-opinion pair extraction methods, which would enable more precise attribution of sentiment to specific aspects within a single comment rather than document-level clustering. Fifth, a scheduled automated monitoring feature could be developed to allow users to set up recurring daily or weekly sentiment analysis reports on tracked topics, providing proactive detection of significant shifts in public opinion over time without requiring manual re-submission.
